Posted Wed, 13 Apr 2011 15:09:00 GMT by Laura Brown30 years ago, Brazil’s Cerrado, a savannah-like spread of land including vegetation, animal and insect life with many endemic species, covered over two million square kilometres.Now, because of a generation of destroying the land to plant crops for European consumers, and eradication of wildlife and plant life at twice the rate of that in the Amazon Rainforest, conservationists fear it could disappear within two decades.The plight of the Cerrado has long been seen as the poor relation of the Rainforest. While the latter receives international recognition leading to concerted campaigns, the Cerrado languishes with an uncertain future.A renewed effort led by the Brazilian government and the World Wildlife Fund (WWF) is attempting to throw the media spotlight on what could be lost if continued farming and agriculture are allowed to continue to expand across the area unchecked. It includes a visit from the UK Government and an effort to make consumers see how their shopping habits could impact on the cerrado’s ongoing destruction.Covering land mass in Brazil, Paraguay and Bolivia, the Cerrado once stood at over two million square kilometres. It now stands at just under 450,000 measuring a loss of 20%. Its uniqueness comes from biodiversity. The Cerrado is home to over 10,000 species of plants, nearly half are endemic. Almost a thousand species of birds call it home, there are 780 species of freshwater fish, 113 of amphibians, 180 of reptiles and 300 mammal species. Over 14,000 species of insects have been catalogued.Viewed by the Brazilian population as mere wasteland in the 60s, the Cerrado was used to build mechanized soy farms, cattle ranches and other crops to sell to the European markets. Much of the soy bean crop is used to feed pigs in Britain and France. Between 2002 and 2008, almost 21,000 square kilometres of the land was lost annually. In the two decades between 1984 and 2004, the ecosystem in the Cerrado was declining at a rate of 1% a year.In an attempt to halt the decline, the WWF launched a campaign to speak directly to supermarkets in the UK, encouraging them to buy soy beans from an approved scheme called the Round Table on Responsible Soy (RTRS). RTRS is a global platform encouraging the responsible production of soy, limiting deforestation and the use of harsh chemicals which damage the environment. Only four UK supermarkets are signed up to the scheme.A recent visit to the Cerrado by UK Environment Minister Caroline Spelman, shed light on the need for its plight to receive the same focus as that of the Amazon rainforest.”The Cerrado is a huge area – as big as France, Germany, Italy, Spain and the UK put together – it’s too important to the whole world to leave its protection to chance.””We want to support Brazil’s efforts to protect the Cerrado, and our countries are already working closely together to safeguard it through deforestation monitoring. But the rest of the world needs to get involved too, recognising that this is an immensely varied and vitally important ecosystem.”In September, Brazil launched a £125 million plan to combat deforestation and protect wildlife in the Cerrado. Their new Cerrado Plan will see US$200 million of federal money invested over the next two years to protect the mixed woodland-savannah.http://www.earthtimes.org/conservation/brazils-cerrado-ugly-duckling-conservation/713/The Cerrado, a savannah that covers more than one-fifth of Brazil, has experienced ongoing deforestation due to the expansion of soy agriculture, led by demand for soybean to produce feed for factory-farmed animals.
Dan J Lloyd guardian.co.uk.  Monday 11 April 2011
http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/video/2011/apr/11/cerrado-deforestation-video
Wooded grasslands of the Cerrado suffering ongoing deforestation as soy agriculture expands to feed growing demand for meat.
Dan J Lloyd in the Cerrado, Brazi. guardian.co.uk, Monday 11 April 2011 14.57 BSThttp://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/2011/apr/11/meat-industry-food
While rainforest destruction grips our attention, one of the world’s great habitats is under threat. Martin Hickman reports from the Cerrado.An “upside-down forest” of small trees with deep roots, Brazil’s wildlife-rich outback is home to a 20th of the world’s species, including the spectacular blue and yellow macaw and giant armadillos.Yet this vast wilderness – as big the UK, France, Germany, Italy and Spain put together – is being rapidly lost to feed the heavily carnivorous appetites of Britons and others.What was, only a generation ago, an almost unbroken two million square kilometre mass of trees and bushes in central Brazil is now covered with fields of soy beans, waiting to be fed to pigs and chickens in Europe and China. Such has been the pace of conversion to agriculture that more than 50 per cent of the Cerrado has already been lost, threatening the future of some of the region’s most charismatic animals.WWF, the wildlife group, now hopes that shoppers in Britain and elsewhere will urge retailers to preserve the Cerrado as robustly as the Amazon rainforest, Brazil’s most famous region, where deforestation has dramatically slowed as a result of international pressure.So far only half of Britain’s supermarkets have joined a responsible trading scheme which has been launched to halt the loss of land, wildlife and the region’s role as a carbon sink. Britain’s Environment Secretary Caroline Spelman, who visited Brazil last week, now wants them to help by sourcing soy responsibly. Unless farmers and retailers around the world start putting tougher limits on the growth of soy farming, there appears to be little hope for Brazil’s semi-humid interior.Little known outside Latin America, the Cerrado stretches from central Brazil westwards and northwards to the edge of the Amazon, covering 23 per cent of the country. Agronomists discovered 30 years ago that its poor orange soil could be transformed into cash crops.After decades of conversion to cattle farming and agriculture, overwhelmingly soy, but also corn and coffee, only 20 per cent of pristine Cerrado remains, much fragmented between farmland.While acknowledging the case for economic development in a country with a GDP per capita of $10,900 (£6,630) last year, WWF Brazil wants development to take place in an orderly way, with much more land set aside for nature than the 3 per cent effectively protected at present.Inside the country, WWF is stressing the region’s role as the supplier of drinking water for the capital Brasilia. Michael Becker, leader of WWF Brazil’s Cerrado programme, said: “The Cerrado is very important for Brazil because it is the water basket; many Brazilian rivers begin in the Cerrado. The Cerrado also has lots of carbon… there is a lot of carbon in the deep roots of the trees.”Environmentalists describe the region as an “upside-down forest”because of the roots, which are twice the length of the above-ground growth of the trees.Among the trees are 5 per cent of the world’s animal species and more than 30 per cent of Brazil’s, including the giant anteater and armadillo, the maned wolf, pampas-deer and the endangered tapir. Wildlife groups fear that soy production to meet rising global demand for meat has shifted from the Amazon rainforest to Brazil’s lesser known interior.Overall, annual deforestation of the Amazon has slowed to 0.18 per cent. The vast majority of the rainforest is still standing, 83 per per cent, and 25 per cent is officially protected. The position in the Cerrado is almost the opposite – only 20 per cent of pristine land is intact and only 8 per cent is officially protected (less than 3 per cent on government or state government land).“Demand for soy is rising globally due to the fact that the soy is used as feed to the meat production industry, mainly in China but also in Europe,” Mr Becker said. “There has been a shift in the production. The Amazon is much more protected but the demand for soy is still rising, so the demand has been going to other parts of Brazil. The Cerrado is very suitable for production and therefore the expansion has occurred there.”After her visit last week, Ms Spelman said: “The Cerrado is globally important in terms of biodiversity and storing the world’s carbon dioxide, but it doesn’t receive the same attention from the international community. Because of that, people are not aware of the uncertain future it faces.”WWF wants consumers to demand that British supermarkets and farmers buy soy only from a scheme, the Round Table on Responsible Soy (RTRS), which limits deforestation and the use of agrichemicals.Although nearly two thirds of the 858,000 tons of soy beans imported into the UK come from Brazil, only four UK supermarkets have joined the RTRS so far: M&S, Waitrose, Asda and Sainsbury’s. Some of the biggest players are absent such as Tesco, responsible for more than 30 per cent of Britain’s £100bn-a-year grocery market.WWF is hoping that consumers in Europe – which imports around 30 per cent of Brazil’s soy – will eat less meat to reduce environmental damage and pressure the all-powerful supermarket giants to back the RTRS. In the long run they hope to enlist backing for the scheme from China, which imports 60 per cent of Brazil’s soy and where meat consumption per capita has trebled in 30 years to move within striking distance of higher European levels.Global pressure has already helped save the Amazon from encroachment. Faced with global outrage five years ago, the world’s top soybean producers, including US commodities giants Cargill, Archer Daniels Midland and Bunge, and France’s Dreyfus and Brazil’s Amaggi, agreed to stop cutting down the Amazon to plant soy.Partly as a result of the soy moratorium and stricter management by Brazil, the rate of deforestation in the Amazon slowed to 6,451 sq km in the year to July 2010, 14 per cent down on the previous year and well below rates of 27,772 sq km recorded in 2004. By contrast, in the Cerrado in 2009, 7,637 sq km a year was lost, more than in the Amazon, in an area half the size.The loss is not only putting at risk animals, plants and the fight against climate change, but also affecting people who have lived off the land in isolated settlements for hundreds of years. Some of them make a living from harvesting and making jams and sweets from the fruits and from gathering plants used by Western medical companies to treat ailments such as high blood pressure.Jose Correia Quintal, head of the Coop Sertao Veredas, who was born in the Cerrado 52 years ago, said: “Development is important – we are not against development – but we understand that the development must be balanced.“[Development] is bringing money and profits. But at the same time agrichemicals are affecting people’s health and contaminating the rivers. The Cerrado biodiversity is very important, because each plant, each fruit, has a use for medicine or for food. Our concern is that many species are disappearing – animals and vegetable species – and we rely on those species to survive.”The Cerrado by numbers2,036,448 sq km in size – about half as large as the Amazon rainforest23 per cent is the proportion of Brazil it covers5 per cent of the world’s plant and animal species are found there80 per cent is the amount of pristine natural habitat lost so far14,200 sq km a year was the rate of deforestation between 2000 and 2008
http://www.independent.co.uk/environment/nature/britains-taste-for-cheap-food-thats-killing-brazils-other-wilderness-2266062.html