FranceChicken product manufacturer Moy Park, and pork producer Cooperl Arc Atalantique, became members of RTRS in 2014. Moy Park purchased 8K Credits. Feed Alliance, a member of the Sofiproteol group, also became an RTRS member. Fromageries Bel, a French cheese manufacturer, joined RTRS in October.GermanyOSI Food Solutions Europebought 16,000 RTRS credits in 2014. The largest poultry feed producer of Germany, MEGA Tierernährung, also became an RTRS Member in 2014 and purchased 6340 RTRS Credits.The NetherlandsThe Milieukeur pork producer decided to only use RTRS certified soy as compound feed. Milieukeur pork is sold at Jumbo supermarkets, the second largest retailer in the Netherlands and also a member of RTRS since 2014. A growing number of Dutch companies purchased RTRS Credits in 2014. The British-Dutch company Unilever, an active member since the foundation of RTRS, has increased its commitment to cover its impact by buying more than 100K RTRS Credits. Meat producer VION acquired 14k credits and FrieslandCampina purchased 7k credits. Feed and meat producers such as Van Rooi Group, Fransen Gerrits B.V., Groothedde, Coppens Diervoeding and Keten Ledo (NMU) also purchased RTRS Credits.Scandinavia The Swedish-Danish cooperative Arla Foods committed to buy RTRS Credits to cover 100% of the soy used by Arla farmers. This resulted in their purchase of 487K credits, making it one of the largest purchases of credits in the history of RTRS. Coop Sweden, HKScan and Danpo A/S all became members of RTRS in 2014. Fortum Värmealso joined RTRS in 2014. This Swedish based company is committed to only using sustainable and traceable bio oil for all energy production. The Swedish Lantmänen (one of the largest groups in Scandinavia within the food, energy, machinery and agriculture industry) and Denofa also obtained RTRS Credits in 2014.United KingdomMarks & Spencer bought 15k RTRS credits in 2014, the highest amount purchased in the retail sector. Retailers HSBC and Tesco joined RTRS in 2014 and the whole of the UK retail sector is now committed to responsible soy. Retailer Waitrosepurchased 1K RTRS Credits and Park Cakes 80 RTRS Credits. Furthermore, the UK organisation Decarbonize joined the group of Observers of RTRS, an important step in supporting the production and trading of responsible soy.We hope the efforts of these European companies will inspire others to commit to responsible soy.