O texto so está disponível em InglêsThere is a business case for soy producers both in Brazil and Argentina to comply to RTRS criteria for responsible soy farming. That is the conclusion of a recent study by KPMG commissioned by IDH in collaboration with IFC, WWF and FMO. Within 3 years producers can expect a positive return on their compliance investments.To comply with the criteria of the Round Table for Responsible Soy (RTRS), soy farmers in Latin America need to make significant investments. These includes one-off investments such as training in better agricultural practices, reforestation on their land, and putting in place a solid documentation system for usage of pesticides and fertilizer. There are also recurrent costs such as audits and certification fees.The KPMG report shows that investments in voluntary certification can be compensated for within 3 to 4 years. The main benefits for the farmer come from a price premium (averaged at EUR 1.50 per ton of beans), from better terms for the purchase of inputs  and for the financing of their farm operations. There are also benefits related to yield increase. In other words, RTRS certified producers are recognized for their social and environmental efforts on top of legal requirements, by the various stakeholders in the soy complex.
Better relations with different stakeholdersThere are also benefits which currently cannot be quantified such as positive impact on the environment due to the implementation of Good Agricultural Practices, better labor conditions, better community relations and access to the European markets and the effect of better management and documentation systems. ‘First movers’ that were interviewed for the case study in both Brazil and Argentina mentioned the advantages of having a better company because of well documented structure and procedures, getting a psychological boost from receiving the RTRS certificate and having a better relationship with different stakeholders in the supply chain. Some producers also believe that standards like RTRS will become business as usual within 5-10 years.
This is the first study that investigates the business case for farmers to comply to RTRS criteria.  Market circumstances such as demand, commodity prices, premiums, terms for input finance, as well as federal laws and regulations may change and influence the business case for soy farmers in Argentina and Brazil in the coming years. In a few years time this KPMG study may act as a baseline. As a development bank, the aim of FMO is to support good agricultural practices to feed a growing world population.Download the KPMG report here